+++
title = "Unicycling Isn't Really Harder Than Walking"

date = 2021-07-17
draft = true
+++

So, here's a hot take.  I think that riding a unicycle isn't significantly harder than walking.

In fact, I would go so far as to say that unicycling and walking are roughly the same difficulty.
This is not to say that unicycling is easy - more that, if you actually stop and think about it,
walking is actually _much, much_ harder than people give it credit for.

## What Do You Mean, Walking is Hard!?

OK, I know what you're thinking.  "This guy is such a nut-case, why am I reading his crazy
thoughts?"  Well, that's a fair question, I guess - but you seem to be find my crazy thoughts
interesting enough to be reading them ðŸ¤·.   Anyway, before you just stop reading and write me off as
a madman, hear me out.

### Human Feet are, Proportionally, Really Small

For bipedal animals (i.e. those that walk on two legs) humans have crazily small feet.  So, let's do
some quick calculations.  To make it a fair comparison, I'm going to compute `height / sqrt(foot
area)` - i.e. treat each species' feet as perfect squares with the same area.  We should really be
computing the height of each species' centre of mass rather than height, but that's super hard to
measure so I'm not going to bother.

The mean human foot length is about 26cm (ironically, not quite one foot), and the width is about
7.8cm.  The average height is about 180cm, which gives us a foot size factor of
`180 / sqrt(26 * 7.8) ~= 13` (i.e. we're roughly 13 times taller than our feet).

Contrast this with, say, a chicken.  Meet Scramble, our sample chicken.

TODO

### We Can Fall in Any Direction

Here's another way walking is hard: when walking, you can fall over in any direction.

OK, I hear you, this is not exactly the deep revelation you were after.  But consider cycling: a
bike can only fall in _two directions_ - left or right.  It technically is possible to make a bike
fall over forwards (I've done it) but it takes serious amounts of energy and you have to be going
quite fast before it's possible at all.  It's really not something you have to worry about while
learning.

And other vehicles, like cars or tricycles, will stay upright by themselves.  You totally can still
flip cars but, like with a bike, it's pretty hard.  In fact, standing upright is about as imbalanced
as you can possibly get.

### So, Walking Actually is Hard

In summary, walking is really a phenomenal balancing act, and it takes new humans _literally
years_ to learn how to do it.  Honestly, you could do nearly anything if you spent a few years
practicing it!

Even with years of nearly-continuous practice, it doesn't take very long to forget how to walk.  As
crazy as this may sound, my dad once broke his leg and, after walking with crutches for several
months, literally had to relearn how to walk.  I don't think this is particularly unusual or that
Dad is incompetent or anything like that; I'm sure other people with similar injuries will have
similar stories.

## Practice Makes Perfect

When I was about five, my family lived in the United States.  As most people do when about five, my
younger brother and I learned to ride a bike.  Now, learning to ride a bike is a fairly challenging
endeavour and involves a lot of repeatedly falling off without really going anywhere.  To keep bro
and me company, my dad learned to ride a unicycle whilst we were learning to ride a bike - so he
would be failing at something at the same time as we were.

Shortly after learning to ride a bike, bro and I learned to ride a unicycle.  After all, once you've
learned to ride one vehicle you may as well keep going.  And 5-year-olds are pretty bouncy and with
shin/elbow pads don't really get hurt if they fall over.  So, we got a truly adorably small unicycle
(TODO: Add picture) and just tried and tried until we could do ride the thing.

I've been able to ride a unicycle for nearly 20 years and, over that period, I have accrued a
seriously large number of hours of practice.  And, as the old adage goes, 'practice makes perfect' -
if you practice anything enough, _it will feel easy_.

So, I don't think walking is much easier than unicycling.  Walking is, in fact, quite difficult.

The only difference between walking and unicycling is that walking _feels easier_ because most of us
have been walking for many hours each day, every day, for many decades.  If you rode a unicycle for
this many hours, it would feel 'as easy as walking'.
